Document Name: HIPAA Person and Entity Authentication
Compliance Family: HIPAA
Topic: identity-authentication
Source: HHS Security Rule Educational Paper Series - Technical Safeguards (Vol 2, Paper 4)
Date Collected: 26/03/2026
Type: Official Documentation


STANDARD
§ 164.312(d)
Person or Entity Authentication
The Person or Entity Authentication standard has no implementation specifications. This
standard requires a covered entity to:
“Implement procedures to verify that a person or entity seeking access to
electronic protected health information is the one claimed.”
In general, authentication ensures that a person is in fact who
he or she claims to be before being allowed access to EPHI.
This is accomplished by providing proof of identity. There
are a few basic ways to provide proof of identity for
authentication. A covered entity may:
Require something known only to that individual, such as a password or PIN.
Require something that individuals possess, such as a smart card, a token, or a
key.
Require something unique to the individual such as a biometric. Examples of
biometrics include fingerprints, voice patterns, facial patterns or iris patterns.
Most covered entities use one of the first two methods of authentication. Many small provider
offices rely on a password or PIN to authenticate the user. If the authentication credentials
entered into an information system match those stored in that system, the user is authenticated.
Once properly authenticated, the user is granted the authorized access privileges to perform
functions and access EPHI. Although the password is the most common way to obtain
authentication to an information system and the easiest to establish, covered entities may want to
explore other authentication methods.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
What types of authentication mechanisms are currently used?
What level or type of authentication is reasonable and appropriate for each
information system with EPHI?
Are other authentication methods available that may be reasonable and
appropriate?