Document Name: HIPAA Security Management Process
Compliance Family: HIPAA
Topic: audit-evidence
Source: HHS Security Rule Educational Paper Series - Administrative Safeguards (Vol 2, Paper 2)
Date Collected: 26/03/2026
Type: Official Documentation

STANDARD
§ 164.308(a)(1)
Security Management Process
The first standard under Administrative Safeguards section is the Security Management Process.
This standard requires covered entities to:
“Implement policies and procedures to prevent, detect, contain and
correct security violations.”
The purpose of this standard is to establish the administrative processes and procedures that a
covered entity will use to implement the security program in its environment. There are four
implementation specifications in the Security Management Process standard.
1. Risk Analysis (Required)
2. Risk Management (Required)
3. Sanction Policy (Required)
4. Information System Activity Review
(Required)
The Importance of Risk Analysis and Risk Management
Risk analysis and risk management are critical to a covered entity’s Security Rule compliance
efforts. Both are standard information security processes that have already been adopted by some
organizations within the health care industry.
As stated in the responses to public comment in the preamble to the Security Rule, the Security
Management Process standard and associated implementation specifications “form the
foundation upon which an entity’s necessary security activities are built.” The results from the
risk analysis and risk management processes will become the baseline for security processes
within covered entities.
This paper provides a general understanding of risk analysis
and risk management concepts and processes. CMS will
include a more detailed discussion of risk analysis and risk
management in paper 6 in the HIPAA Security Series titled,
“Basics of Risk Analysis and Risk Management.”
NOTE: Risk analysis and risk
management serve as tools to
assist in the development of a
covered entity’s strategy to
protect the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of
EPHI.
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 2 4 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
1. RISK ANALYSIS (R) - § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A)
The Risk Analysis implementation specification requires covered entities to:
“Conduct an accurate and thorough assessment of the potential risks and
vulnerabilities to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of
electronic protected health information held by the covered entity.”
In general, a risk analysis can be viewed as:
 The process of identifying potential security risks, and
 Determining the probability of occurrence and magnitude of risks.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 How does EPHI flow throughout the organization? This includes EPHI that
is created, received, maintained or transmitted by the covered entity.
 What are the less obvious sources of EPHI? Has the organization considered
portable devices like PDAs?
 What are the external sources of EPHI? For example, do vendors or
consultants create, receive, maintain or transmit EPHI?
 What are the human, natural, and environmental threats to information
systems that contain EPHI?
2. RISK MANAGEMENT (R) - § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(B)
Risk Management is a required implementation specification. It requires an organization
to make decisions about how to address security risks and vulnerabilities. The Risk
Management implementation specification states that covered entities must:
“Implement security measures sufficient to reduce risks and
vulnerabilities to a reasonable and appropriate level to comply with
§164.306(a).”
Risk management is the process used to identify and implement security measures to
reduce risk to a reasonable and appropriate level within the covered entity based on the
covered entity’s circumstances. The measures implemented to comply with this required
implementation specification must also allow the covered entity to comply with §
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 2 5 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
164.306(a) of the Security Standards: General Rules. Covered entities will want to
answer some basic questions when planning their risk management process.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 What security measures are already in place to protect EPHI (i.e.,
safeguards)?
 Is executive leadership and/or management involved in risk management
and mitigation decisions?
 Are security processes being communicated throughout the organization?
 Does the covered entity need to engage other resources to assist in risk
management?
In general, a covered entity will want to make sure its
risk management strategy takes into account the
characteristics of its environment including the
factors at § 164.306(b)(2), which are listed on page 2
of this paper. These factors will help the covered
entity to determine what potential security measures
are reasonable and appropriate for its environment.
3. SANCTION POLICY (R) - § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(C)
Another implementation specification in the Security Management Process is the
Sanction Policy. It requires covered entities to:
“Apply appropriate sanctions against workforce members who fail to
comply with the security policies and procedures of the covered entity.”
Appropriate sanctions must be in place so that workforce members understand the
consequences of failing to comply with security policies and procedures, to deter
noncompliance.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
Does the covered entity have existing sanction policies and procedures to
meet the requirements of this implementation specification? If not, can
NOTE: Covered entities must
ensure that the risk analysis
and risk management
processes are on-going and
dynamic processes that can
change as the environment or
operations change.
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 2 6 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
existing sanction policies be modified to include language relating to
violations of these policies and procedures?
Does the organization require employees to sign a statement of adherence to
security policy and procedures (e.g., as part of the employee handbook or
confidentiality statement) as a prerequisite to employment?
Does the statement of adherence to
security policies and procedures state
that the workforce member
acknowledges that violations of security
policies and procedures may lead to
disciplinary action, for example, up to
and including termination?
Does the sanction policy provide examples of potential violations of policy
and procedures?
Does the sanction policy adjust the disciplinary action based on the severity
of the violation?
4. INFORMATION SYSTEM ACTIVITY REVIEW (R) - § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(D)
The Security Management Process standard also includes the Information System
Activity Review implementation specification. This required implementation
specification states that covered entities must:
“Implement procedures to regularly review records of information system
activity, such as audit logs, access reports, and security incident tracking
reports.”
The information system activity review enables covered entities to determine if any EPHI
is used or disclosed in an inappropriate manner.
Information system activity review procedures may be different for each covered entity.
The procedure should be customized to meet the covered entity’s risk management
strategy and take into account the capabilities of all information systems with EPHI.
NOTE: A covered entity’s
sanction policy should reinforce
its security policies and
procedures.
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 2 7 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
STANDARD
§ 164.308(a)(2)
NOTE: The Information
System Activity Review
implementation specification
should also promote continual
awareness of any information
system activity that could
suggest a security incident.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
What are the audit and activity review functions of the current information
systems?
Are the information systems functions
adequately used and monitored to
promote continual awareness of
information system activity?
What logs or reports are generated by
the information systems?
Is there a policy that establishes what reviews will be conducted?
Is there a procedure that describes specifics of the reviews?
