Document Name: HIPAA Access Control
Compliance Family: HIPAA
Topic: access-control
Source: HHS Security Rule Educational Paper Series - Technical Safeguards (Vol 2, Paper 4)
Date Collected: 26/03/2026
Type: Official Documentation

STANDARD
§ 164.312(a)(1)
Access Control
The Security Rule defines access in § 164.304 as “the ability or the means necessary to read,
write, modify, or communicate data/information or otherwise use any system resource. (This
definition applies to “access” as used in this subpart, not as used in subpart E of this part [the
HIPAA Privacy Rule]).” Access controls provide users with rights and/or privileges to access
and perform functions using information systems, applications, programs, or files. Access
controls should enable authorized users to access the minimum necessary information needed to
perform job functions. Rights and/or privileges should be granted to authorized users based on a
set of access rules that the covered entity is required to
implement as part of § 164.308(a)(4), the Information Access
Management standard under the Administrative Safeguards
section of the Rule.
The Access Control standard requires a covered entity to:
NOTE: For more information
about Risk Analysis and Risk
Management, see paper 6 in
this series, “Basics of Risk
Analysis and Risk
Management.”
4 Security Standards: Technical Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 4 4 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
NOTE: For a discussion on
“required“ and “addressable”
Implementation Specifications,
see the first paper in this series,
“Security 101 for Covered
Entities.”
“Implement technical policies and procedures for electronic information
systems that maintain electronic protected health information to allow
access only to those persons or software programs that have been granted
access rights as specified in § 164.308(a)(4)[Information Access
Management].”
A covered entity can comply with this standard through a combination of access control methods
and technical controls. There are a variety of access control methods and technical controls that
are available within most information systems. The Security Rule does not identify a specific
type of access control method or technology to implement.
Regardless of the technology or information system used,
access controls should be appropriate for the role and/or
function of the workforce member. For example, even
workforce members responsible for monitoring and
administering information systems with EPHI, such as
administrators or super users, must only have access to EPHI
as appropriate for their role and/or job function.
Four implementation specifications are associated with the Access Controls standard.
1. Unique User Identification (Required)
2. Emergency Access Procedure (Required)
3. Automatic Logoff (Addressable)
4. Encryption and Decryption (Addressable)
1. UNIQUE USER IDENTIFICATION (R) - § 164.312(a)(2)(i)
The Unique User Identification implementation specification states that a covered entity
must:
“Assign a unique name and/or number for identifying and tracking user
identity.”
User identification is a way to identify a specific user of an information system, typically
by name and/or number. A unique user identifier allows an entity to track specific user
activity when that user is logged into an information system. It enables an entity to hold
users accountable for functions performed on information systems with EPHI when
logged into those systems.
The Rule does not describe or provide a single format for user identification. Covered
entities must determine the best user identification strategy based on their workforce and
4 Security Standards: Technical Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 4 5 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
NOTE: Like many of the
Technical Safeguards
implementation specifications,
covered entities may already
have emergency access
procedures in place.
operations. Some organizations may use the employee name or a variation of the name
(e.g. jsmith). However, other organizations may choose an alternative such as
assignment of a set of random numbers and characters. A randomly assigned user
identifier is more difficult for an unauthorized user (e.g., a hacker) to guess, but may also
be more difficult for authorized users to remember and management to recognize. The
organization must weigh these factors when making its decision. Regardless of the
format, unlike email addresses, no one other than the user needs to remember the user
identifier.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 Does each workforce member have a unique user identifier?
 What is the current format used for unique user identification?
 Can the unique user identifier be used to track user activity within
information systems that contain EPHI?
2. EMERGENCY ACCESS PROCEDURE (R) - § 164.312(a)(2)(ii)
This implementation specification requires a covered entity to:
“Establish (and implement as needed) procedures for obtaining necessary
electronic protected health information during an emergency.”
These procedures are documented instructions and operational practices for obtaining
access to necessary EPHI during an emergency situation. Access controls are necessary
under emergency conditions, although they may be
very different from those used in normal operational
circumstances. Covered entities must determine the
types of situations that would require emergency
access to an information system or application that
contains EPHI.
Procedures must be established beforehand to instruct
workforce members on possible ways to gain access to needed EPHI in, for example, a
situation in which normal environmental systems, such as electrical power, have been
severely damaged or rendered inoperative due to a natural or manmade disaster.
4 Security Standards: Technical Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 4 6 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 Who needs access to the EPHI in the event of an emergency?
 Are there policies and procedures in place to provide appropriate access to
EPHI in emergency situations?
3. AUTOMATIC LOGOFF (A) - § 164.312(a)(2)(iii)
Where this implementation specification is a reasonable and appropriate safeguard for a
covered entity, the covered entity must:
“Implement electronic procedures that terminate an electronic session
after a predetermined time of inactivity.”
As a general practice, users should logoff the system they are working on when their
workstation is unattended. However, there will be times when workers may not have the
time, or will not remember, to log off a workstation. Automatic logoff is an effective
way to prevent unauthorized users from accessing EPHI on a workstation when it is left
unattended for a period of time.
Many applications have configuration settings for automatic logoff. After a
predetermined period of inactivity the application will automatically logoff the user.
Some systems that may have more limited capabilities may activate an operating system
screen saver that is password protected after a period of system inactivity. In either case,
the information that was displayed on the screen is no longer accessible to unauthorized
users.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 Do current information systems have an automatic logoff capability?
 Is the automatic logoff feature activated on all workstations with access to
EPHI?
4. ENCRYTION AND DECRYPTION (A) - § 164.312(a)(2)(iv)
Where this implementation specification is a reasonable and appropriate safeguard for a
covered entity, the covered entity must:
“Implement a mechanism to encrypt and decrypt electronic protected
health information.”
4 Security Standards: Technical Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 4 7 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
STANDARD
§ 164.312(b)
NOTE: The goal of encryption
is to protect EPHI from being
accessed and viewed by
unauthorized users.
Encryption is a method of converting an original
message of regular text into encoded text. The text is
encrypted by means of an algorithm (i.e., type of
procedure or formula). If information is encrypted,
there would be a low probability that anyone other
than the receiving party who has the key to the code or access to another confidential
process would be able to decrypt (i.e., translate) the text and convert it into plain,
comprehensible text.
There are many different encryption methods and technologies to protect data from being
accessed and viewed by unauthorized users.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 Which EPHI should be encrypted and decrypted to prevent access by
persons or software programs that have not been granted access rights?
 What encryption and decryption mechanisms are reasonable and appropriate
to implement to prevent access to EPHI by persons or software programs
that have not been granted access rights?