Document Name: HIPAA Transmission Security
Compliance Family: HIPAA
Topic: network-protection
Source: HHS Security Rule Educational Paper Series - Technical Safeguards (Vol 2, Paper 4)
Date Collected: 26/03/2026
Type: Official Documentation

STANDARD
§ 164.312(e)(1)
Transmission Security
The final standard listed in the Technical Safeguards section is Transmission Security. This
standard requires a covered entity to:
“Implement technical security measures to guard against unauthorized
access to electronic protected health information that is being transmitted
over an electronic communications network.”
In order to determine the technical security measures to implement to comply with this standard,
covered entities must review the current methods used to transmit EPHI. For instance, is EPHI
transmitted through email, over the Internet, or via some form of private or point-to-point
network? Once the methods of transmission are reviewed, the covered entity must identify the
available and appropriate means to protect EPHI as it is transmitted, select appropriate solutions,
4 Security Standards: Technical Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 4 11 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
and document its decisions. The Security Rule allows for EPHI to be sent over an electronic
open network as long as it is adequately protected.
This standard has two implementation specifications:
1. Integrity Controls (Addressable)
2. Encryption (Addressable)
1. INTEGRITY CONTROLS (A) - § 164.312(e)(2)(i)
Where this implementation specification is a reasonable and appropriate safeguard for a
covered entity, the covered entity must:
“Implement security measures to ensure that electronically transmitted
electronic protected health information is not improperly modified without
detection until disposed of.”
Protecting the integrity of EPHI maintained in information systems was discussed
previously in the Integrity standard. Integrity in this context is focused on making sure
the EPHI is not improperly modified during transmission.
A primary method for protecting the integrity of EPHI being transmitted is through the
use of network communications protocols. In
general, these protocols, among other things, ensure
that the data sent is the same as the data received.
There are other security measures that can provide
integrity controls for EPHI being transmitted over an
electronic communications network, such as data or
message authentication codes, that a covered entity
may want to consider.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 What security measures are currently used to protect EPHI during
transmission?
 Has the risk analysis identified scenarios that may result in modification to
EPHI by unauthorized sources during transmission?
NOTE: A covered entity should
discuss reasonable and
appropriate security measures
to protect the integrity of EPHI
during transmission with its IT
professionals, vendors,
business associates, and
trading partners.
4 Security Standards: Technical Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 4 12 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
 What security measures can be implemented to protect EPHI in transmission
from unauthorized access?
2. ENCRYPTION (A) - § 164.312(e)(2)(ii)
Where this implementation specification is a reasonable and appropriate safeguard for a
covered entity, the covered entity must:
“Implement a mechanism to encrypt electronic protected health
information whenever deemed appropriate.”
As previously described in the Access Control standard, encryption is a method of
converting an original message of regular text into encoded or unreadable text that is
eventually decrypted into plain comprehensible text. The Encryption implementation
specification is addressable, similar to the addressable implementation specification at §
164.312(a)(2)(iv), which addresses Encryption and Decryption.
There are various types of encryption technology available to covered entities. For an
encryption strategy to be successful, an organization must consider many factors. For
example, for encryption technologies to work properly when data is being transmitted,
both the sender and receiver must be using the same or compatible technology.
Covered entities use open networks such as the Internet and e-mail systems differently.
Currently no single interoperable encryption solution for communicating over open
networks exists. Adopting a single industry-wide
encryption standard in the Security Rule would likely
have placed too high a financial and technical burden
on many covered entities. The Security Rule allows
covered entities the flexibility to determine when,
with whom, and what method of encryption to use.
A covered entity should discuss reasonable and appropriate security measures for the
encryption of EPHI during transmission over electronic communications networks with
its IT professionals, vendors, business associates, and trading partners.
Covered entities must consider the use of encryption for transmitting EPHI, particularly
over the Internet. As business practices and technology change, situations may arise
where EPHI being transmitted from a covered entity would be at significant risk of being
accessed by unauthorized entities. Where risk analysis shows such risk to be significant, a
covered entity must encrypt those transmissions under the addressable implementation
specification for encryption.
NOTE: There are various types
of encryption technology. To
work properly, both the sender
and the receiver must use the
same or compatible technology.
4 Security Standards: Technical Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 4 13 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 How does the organization transmit EPHI?
 How often does the organization transmit EPHI?
 Based on the risk analysis, is encryption needed to protect EPHI during
transmission?
 What methods of encryption will be used to protect the transmission of
EPHI?
In Summary
The Security Rule Technical Safeguards are the technology and related policies and procedures
that protect EPHI and control access to it. The Technical Safeguards standards apply to all
EPHI. The Rule requires a covered entity to comply with the Technical Safeguards standards
and provides the flexibility to covered entities to determine which technical security measures
will be implemented.
Together with reasonable and appropriate Administrative and Physical Safeguards, successful
implementation of the Technical Safeguards standards will help ensure that a covered entity will
protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of EPHI.
4 Security Standards: Technical Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 4 14 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
Resources
The remaining papers in this series will address other specific topics related to the Security Rule.
The next paper in this series covers the final sections of the Security Rule, Organizational
Requirements and Policies and Procedures and Documentation Requirements.
Covered entities should periodically check the CMS website at www.cms.hhs.gov under
“Regulations and Guidance” for additional information and resources as they work through the
security implementation process. There are many other sources of information available on the
Internet. While CMS does not endorse guidance provided by other organizations, covered
entities may also want to check with other local and national professional health care
organizations, such as national provider and health plan associations for additional information.
Need more information?
Visit the CMS website often at www.cms.hhs.gov under “Regulations and Guidance” for the
latest security papers, checklists, and announcements of upcoming events.
Visit the Office for Civil Rights website, http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa, for the latest
guidance, FAQs and other information on the Privacy Rule.