Document Name: HIPAA Contingency Plan
Compliance Family: HIPAA
Topic: backup-recovery
Source: HHS Security Rule Educational Paper Series - Administrative Safeguards (Vol 2, Paper 2)
Date Collected: 26/03/2026
Type: Official Documentation

STANDARD
§ 164.308(a)(7)
Contingency Plan
The purpose of contingency planning is to establish strategies for recovering access to EPHI
should the organization experience an emergency or other occurrence, such as a power outage
and/or disruption of critical business operations. The goal is to ensure that organizations have
their EPHI available when it is needed. The Contingency Plan standard requires that covered
entities:
“Establish (and implement as needed) policies and procedures for
responding to an emergency or other occurrence (for example, fire,
vandalism, system failure, and natural disaster) that damages systems that
contain electronic protected health information.”
The Contingency Plan standard includes five implementation specifications.
1. Data Backup Plan (Required)
2. Disaster Recovery Plan (Required)
3. Emergency Mode Operation Plan (Required)
4. Testing and Revision Procedures (Addressable)
5. Applications and Data Criticality Analysis (Addressable)
1. DATA BACKUP PLAN (R) - § 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(A)
The Data Backup Plan implementation specification requires covered entities to:
“Establish and implement procedures to create and maintain retrievable
exact copies of electronic protected health information.”
Most covered entities may have backup procedures as part of current business practices.
Data Backup plans are an important safeguard for all covered entities, and a required
implementation specification.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 What is the EPHI that must be backed up?
 Does the plan include all important sources of data such as patient
accounting systems, electronic medical records, health maintenance and
case management information, digital recordings of diagnostic images,
electronic test results, or any other electronic documents created or used?
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 2 20 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
 Has the organization considered the various methods of backups, including
tape, disk, or CD?
 Does the backup plan include storage of backups in a safe, secure place?
 Is the organization’s frequency of backups appropriate for its environment?
2. DISASTER RECOVERY PLAN (R) - § 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(B)
The Disaster Recovery Plan implementation specification requires covered entities to:
“Establish (and implement as needed) procedures to restore any loss of
data.”
Some covered entities may already have a general disaster plan that meets this
requirement; however, each entity must review the current plan to ensure that it allows
them to recover EPHI.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 Does the disaster recovery plan address issues specific to the covered
entity’s operating environment?
 Does the plan address what data is to be restored?
 Is a copy of the disaster recovery plan readily accessible at more than one
location?
3. EMERGENCY MODE OPERATION PLAN (R) - § 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(C)
The Emergency Mode Operation Plan implementation specification requires covered
entities to:
“Establish (and implement as needed) procedures to enable continuation
of critical business processes for protection of the security of electronic
protected health information while operating in emergency mode.”
When a covered entity is operating in emergency mode due to a technical failure or
power outage, security processes to protect EPHI must be maintained.
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 2 21 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 Does the organization’s plan balance the need to protect the data with the
organization’s need to access the data?
 Will alternative security measures be used to protect the EPHI?
 Does the emergency mode operation plan include possible manual
procedures for security protection that can be implemented as needed?
 Does the emergency mode operation plan include telephone numbers and
contact names for all persons that must be notified in the event of a disaster,
as well as roles and responsibilities of those people involved in the
restoration process?
4. TESTING AND REVISION PROCEDURES (A) - § 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(D)
Where the Testing and Revision Procedures implementation specification is a reasonable
and appropriate safeguard for the covered entity, the covered entity must:
“Implement procedures for periodic testing and revision of contingency
plans.”
It is important to point out that this implementation specification applies to all
implementation specifications under the Contingency Plan standard, including the Data
Backup Plan, Disaster Recovery Plan, and Emergency Mode Operations Plan.
Disaster recovery and emergency mode operations
plans might be tested by using a scenario-based walk-
thru (to avoid daily operations impacts) or by
performing complete live tests. The comprehensiveness
and sophistication of the testing and revision
procedures depends on the complexity of the covered entity’s organization and other
factors such as size and costs. It is expected that the frequency and comprehensiveness of
the procedures will vary among covered entities.
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
 Are the processes for restoring data from backups, disaster recovery and
emergency mode operation documented?
NOTE: Testing and revision
procedures will vary in
frequency and
comprehensiveness.
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 2 22 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
STANDARD
§ 164.308(a)(8)
 Do those responsible for performing contingency planning tasks understand
their responsibilities?
 Have those responsible actually
performed a test of the procedures?
 Have the results of each test been
documented and any problems with the
test reviewed and corrected?
5. APPLICATION AND DATA CRITICALITY ANALYSIS (A) -
§ 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(E)
The last implementation specification in the Contingency Plan standard is Application
and Data Criticality Analysis. Where this implementation specification is a reasonable
and appropriate safeguard for the covered entity, the covered entity must:
“Assess the relative criticality of specific applications and data in support
of other contingency plan components.”
This implementation specification requires covered entities to identify their software
applications (data applications that store, maintain or transmit EPHI) and determine how
important each is to patient care or business needs, in order to prioritize for data backup,
disaster recovery and/or emergency operations plans. A prioritized list of specific
applications and data will help determine which applications or information systems get
restored first and/or which must be available at all times.
