Document Name: HIPAA Encryption
Compliance Family: HIPAA
Topic: encryption
Source: HHS Security Rule Educational Paper Series - Technical Safeguards (Vol 2, Paper 4)
Date Collected: 26/03/2026
Type: Official Documentation


2. ENCRYPTION (A) - § 164.312(e)(2)(ii)
Where this implementation specification is a reasonable and appropriate safeguard for a
covered entity, the covered entity must:
“Implement a mechanism to encrypt electronic protected health
information whenever deemed appropriate.”
As previously described in the Access Control standard, encryption is a method of
converting an original message of regular text into encoded or unreadable text that is
eventually decrypted into plain comprehensible text. The Encryption implementation
specification is addressable, similar to the addressable implementation specification at §
164.312(a)(2)(iv), which addresses Encryption and Decryption.
There are various types of encryption technology available to covered entities. For an
encryption strategy to be successful, an organization must consider many factors. For
example, for encryption technologies to work properly when data is being transmitted,
both the sender and receiver must be using the same or compatible technology.
Covered entities use open networks such as the Internet and e-mail systems differently.
Currently no single interoperable encryption solution for communicating over open
networks exists. Adopting a single industry-wide
encryption standard in the Security Rule would likely
have placed too high a financial and technical burden
on many covered entities. The Security Rule allows
covered entities the flexibility to determine when,
with whom, and what method of encryption to use.
A covered entity should discuss reasonable and appropriate security measures for the
encryption of EPHI during transmission over electronic communications networks with
its IT professionals, vendors, business associates, and trading partners.
Covered entities must consider the use of encryption for transmitting EPHI, particularly
over the Internet. As business practices and technology change, situations may arise
where EPHI being transmitted from a covered entity would be at significant risk of being
accessed by unauthorized entities. Where risk analysis shows such risk to be significant, a
covered entity must encrypt those transmissions under the addressable implementation
specification for encryption.
NOTE: There are various types
of encryption technology. To
work properly, both the sender
and the receiver must use the
same or compatible technology.
4 Security Standards: Technical Safeguards
Volume 2 / Paper 4 13 5/2005: rev. 3/2007
Sample questions for covered entities to consider:
How does the organization transmit EPHI?
How often does the organization transmit EPHI?
Based on the risk analysis, is encryption needed to protect EPHI during
transmission?
What methods of encryption will be used to protect the transmission of
EPHI?