Document Name: ISO 27001 Data Retention
Compliance Family: ISO 27001
Topic: data-retention
Source: ISO/IEC 27001:2022 - Annex A Controls 5.33 and 8.10
Date Collected: 27/03/2026
Type: Official Documentation


5.33 Protection of Records
Control:
Records shall be protected from loss, destruction, falsification, unauthorized access and
unauthorized release.

8.10 Information Deletion
Control:
Information stored in information systems, devices or in any other storage media shall be
deleted when no longer required.

Additional related controls:

7.5.3 Control of Documented Information (from Section 7):
Documented information required by the information security management system and by this
document shall be controlled to ensure:
a) it is available and suitable for use, where and when it is needed; and
b) it is adequately protected (e.g. from loss of confidentiality, improper use, or loss of integrity).
For the control of documented information, the organization shall address the following
activities, as applicable:
c) distribution, access, retrieval and use;
d) storage and preservation, including the preservation of legibility;
e) control of changes (e.g. version control); and
f) retention and disposition.
Documented information of external origin, determined by the organization to be necessary for
the planning and operation of the information security management system, shall be identified
as appropriate, and controlled.

5.12 Classification of Information
Control:
Information shall be classified according to the information security needs of the organization
based on confidentiality, integrity, availability and relevant interested party requirements.

5.31 Legal, Statutory, Regulatory and Contractual Requirements
Control:
Legal, statutory, regulatory and contractual requirements relevant to information security and
the organization's approach to meet these requirements shall be identified, documented and
kept up to date.

7.10 Storage Media
Control:
Storage media shall be managed through their life cycle of acquisition, use, transportation and
disposal in accordance with the organization's classification scheme and handling requirements.

7.14 Secure Disposal or Re-use of Equipment
Control:
Items of equipment containing storage media shall be verified to ensure that any sensitive data
and licensed software has been removed or securely overwritten prior to disposal or re-use.