Document Name: ISO 27001 Logging and Monitoring
Compliance Family: ISO 27001
Topic: logging
Source: ISO/IEC 27001:2022 - Annex A Controls 8.15 and 8.16
Date Collected: 27/03/2026
Type: Official Documentation


8.15 Logging
Control:
Logs that record activities, exceptions, faults and other relevant events shall be produced,
stored, protected and analysed.

8.16 Monitoring Activities
Control:
Networks, systems and applications shall be monitored for anomalous behaviour and appropriate
actions taken to evaluate potential information security incidents.

Additional related controls:

8.17 Clock Synchronization
Control:
The clocks of information processing systems used by the organization shall be synchronized
to approved time sources.

9.1 Monitoring, Measurement, Analysis and Evaluation
The organization shall determine:
a) what needs to be monitored and measured, including information security processes and controls;
b) the methods for monitoring, measurement, analysis and evaluation, as applicable, to ensure valid
results. The methods selected should produce comparable and reproducible results to be considered
valid;
c) when the monitoring and measuring shall be performed;
d) who shall monitor and measure;
e) when the results from monitoring and measurement shall be analysed and evaluated;
f) who shall analyse and evaluate these results.
Documented information shall be available as evidence of the results.
The organization shall evaluate the information security performance and the effectiveness of the
information security management system.

5.25 Assessment and Decision on Information Security Events
Control:
The organization shall assess information security events and decide if they are to be categorized
as information security incidents.

5.26 Response to Information Security Incidents
Control:
Information security incidents shall be responded to in accordance with the documented procedures.

5.27 Learning from Information Security Incidents
Control:
Knowledge gained from information security incidents shall be used to strengthen and improve
the information security controls.

5.28 Collection of Evidence
Control:
The organization shall establish and implement procedures for the identification, collection,
acquisition and preservation of evidence related to information security events.