Document Name: ISO 27001 Audit Evidence
Compliance Family: ISO 27001
Topic: audit-evidence
Source: ISO/IEC 27001:2022 - Sections 9.2.1 and 9.2.2
Date Collected: 27/03/2026
Type: Official Documentation


9.2 Internal Audit

9.2.1 General
The organization shall conduct internal audits at planned intervals to provide information on
whether the information security management system:
a) conforms to:
   1) the organization's own requirements for its information security management system;
   2) the requirements of this document;
b) is effectively implemented and maintained.

9.2.2 Internal Audit Programme
The organization shall plan, establish, implement and maintain an audit programme(s), including
the frequency, methods, responsibilities, planning requirements and reporting.
When establishing the internal audit programme(s), the organization shall consider the importance
of the processes concerned and the results of previous audits.
The organization shall:
a) define the audit criteria and scope for each audit;
b) select auditors and conduct audits that ensure objectivity and the impartiality of the audit process;
c) ensure that the results of the audits are reported to relevant management.
Documented information shall be available as evidence of the implementation of the audit
programme(s) and the audit results.

9.3 Management Review

9.3.1 General
Top management shall review the organization's information security management system at
planned intervals to ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy and effectiveness.

9.3.2 Management Review Inputs
The management review shall include consideration of:
a) the status of actions from previous management reviews;
b) changes in external and internal issues that are relevant to the information security management
   system;
c) changes in needs and expectations of interested parties that are relevant to the information
   security management system;
d) feedback on the information security performance, including trends in:
   1) nonconformities and corrective actions;
   2) monitoring and measurement results;
   3) audit results;
   4) fulfilment of information security objectives;
e) feedback from interested parties;
f) results of risk assessment and status of risk treatment plan;
g) opportunities for continual improvement.

9.3.3 Management Review Results
The results of the management review shall include decisions related to continual improvement
opportunities and any needs for changes to the information security management system.
Documented information shall be available as evidence of the results of management reviews.

Additional related controls from Annex A:

5.35 Independent Review of Information Security
Control:
The organization's approach to managing information security and its implementation including
people, processes and technologies shall be reviewed independently at planned intervals, or when
significant changes occur.

5.36 Compliance with Policies, Rules and Standards for Information Security
Control:
Compliance with the organization's information security policy, topic-specific policies, rules and
standards shall be regularly reviewed.

10.2 Nonconformity and Corrective Action (from Section 10):
When a nonconformity occurs, the organization shall:
a) react to the nonconformity, and as applicable take action to control and correct it and deal with
   the consequences;
b) evaluate the need for action to eliminate the causes of nonconformity in order that it does not
   recur or occur elsewhere;
c) implement any action needed;
d) review the effectiveness of any corrective action taken; and
e) make changes to the information security management system, if necessary.
Documented information shall be available as evidence of the nature of the nonconformities and
any subsequent actions taken, and the results of any corrective action.